
Audit and Assessment skill

Threat and Lateral Movement Checkpoint 6






Lateral Movement in cybersecurity is not only a technic for gaining access  but also allows progressively  to look up 

deep and extract sensitive and high value data.

since the access is  performed through a network endpoint almost by phishing,ransomware or malware .

the following is to steal user previleges using various tools and technics to go beyond the compromised system.

So :
 1  exploring the network to find their target  and make a breach of an endpoint in the network : initial access (initial 

foothold)
 2  compromise account credentials  and the hacker attempts to gain unauthorized access to other nodes
 3  gain previlege escalation and infiltration all the network by moving between applications and devices in a network to 

isolate targets
 4  map the system and ultimately gets  what is supposed to be high value data or make system or devices target 

damaged

Common Stages of Lateral Movement

   three main stages : 
      reconnaissance, 
      credential/privilege gathering
      gaining access to other network nodes



Lateral movement security challenges  

    Phishing Attacks.
    Malware Attacks.
    Ransomware.
    Weak Passwords.
    Insider Threats.


in lateral movement attack  the first time to bypass the endpoint not exceed the 20% of the all time to reach the target 
so 80% of time is to make escalation and infltrate other network nodes
in order to defend the network  and detect the lateral movement  the following actions might be very useful :

 user accounts behavior and tracking 
 monitoring network 
 log analysis
 anomaly based detection 
 SIEM
 machine learning
 managing alerts 
 endpoint detection and response (EDR)
 Threat hunting



Difference between Lateral Movement and Advanced Persistent Threat Campaigns



Advanced Persistent Threat Campaigns is a sophisticated Lateral Movement that  
requires a huge ressources and experienced hackers (as a great organisation or state) than a traditional attack.
the tools and methods are also advanced  as zero-day vulnerabilities ,spear phishing and other social engineering 

techniques in order to maintain access to the targeted network without being discovered, 
threat actors will continuously rewrite malicious code to avoid detection and other sophisticated evasion techniques. 
Some APTs are so complex that they require full-time administrators to maintain the compromised systems and 
software in the targeted network.


The goals of APTs fall into four general categories:

    Cyber Espionage, intellectual property , state secrets
    eCrime for financial gain
    Hacktivism
    Destruction


to detect that the network is targeted by APT attack  a look of  anomalies in outbound data is suggested 
hackers can still a log time in the system until they were detected  and even detected they can create a backdoor so they 

can access the system again later.


 
APT schema attack process 
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/APT-attack-process-Chen-et-al-2014-Mehresh-Upadhyaya-2016-Adelaiye-

Showole_fig1_341931458





Lateral Movement available Techniques

Examples of lateral movement 

    Pass the hash (PtH)
    Pass the ticket (PtT)
    Exploitation of remote services.
    Internal spearphishing.
    SSH hijacking.
    Windows admin shares.

  after the first access to the entry point 

*internal reconnaissance :  gather info about  OS ,network map, servers ,applications ,where is the high value data is 

stored

   among utilities used :
    Netstat
    IPConfig/IFConfig
    ARP cache
    Local routing table
    PowerShell

* infiltrating other nodes of the network  : stolen credentials  provide access to log on  and target network hosts  to 

make escalation and  acting like an IT support 

 among utilities used :
   Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP, PsExec, AT, VBScript and open source tools including     Metasploit.
    PowerShell and Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) are some newer     techniques used by attackers.
 
* credential theft techniques
  among utilities used :

    APR spoofing 
    DNS responder .
    SMB relay — relies on NTLM Version 2 
    Pass the ticket

so the tools to achieve a lateral movement may vary but the general strategy is to gain access in a lower previlege and 

increase that bit by bit 

hackers  may use Windows DCOM  to gain shellcode and execute macros
may exploit an existed  an error in a hardware or software to gain remote control
they may use the encrypted hash of a password to access remote servers




Lateral Movement can be accomplished by automated tools
Nowadays lateral movement can be deployed with automated bots and tools

Instances of the automation include 

WannaCry : a ransomware attack
WannaMine : a cryptocurrency-mining malware
EternalBlue : is an exploit created by the U.S. NSA
NotPetya   :new form of ransomware




Conclusion     

Operational Defense

 To limit the success of lateral movement attacks 

 key defense domains suggested to focus on them are

     Strategic :   whats the network design whats its different locations on specific subnets
                       intruders used tools restriction such as PsExec
  
     Tactical  :     tracking unexpected logins 
     Operational :  access management list and  multifactor authentication (MFA)

in lateral movement intruders activities can be undetected or even untraceable with  high-risk threat 
Security team can offense this with improved strategic tactical and operational security.

 






this take me a long time  and it is not a literally copy paste  a reformulation of my english words from multi mixed 
sources  (only the use of successive words for APT)
